**Unified Product Feature Specification: AI Prompt Engineering
Platform**

**1. Executive Summary**

This document outlines the comprehensive feature set for a
next-generation, professional-grade AI Prompt Engineering Platform. The
platform is designed to serve as an indispensable tool for developers,
prompt engineers, content creators, and teams looking to maximize the
effectiveness of their interactions with Large Language Models (LLMs).

**Core Product Vision:** To provide an integrated web-based environment
for crafting, testing, managing, and collaborating on complex AI
prompts. The platform uniquely combines a secure, local-file-aware
context builder with an advanced prompt studio, a multi-model execution
engine, and a robust versioning system. This core functionality is
augmented by a community library for discovering proven prompts and
enterprise-grade features for team collaboration and analytics.

This specification synthesizes multiple source documents into a single,
coherent vision, prioritizing a professional, developer-first workflow
while retaining valuable community and user experience concepts.

**Part I: Core Prompt Engineering & Workspace**

This section defines the primary, single-player experience that forms
the foundation of the platform.

**Feature 1: Visual Context Engineering & File Management**

**Goal:** To provide a secure, intuitive interface for connecting a
local project folder and selecting files, directories, and code snippets
to serve as context for an AI prompt, with deep integration into Git
workflows.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Local Project Connection:**

  - Securely connect to a local project folder using the browser's File
    System Access API (window.showDirectoryPicker()).

  - Request persistent read permissions to maintain access across
    sessions without re-prompting.

  - Store directory handles in IndexedDB for a "Recent Projects"
    feature.

- **Hierarchical File Explorer UI:**

  - Display a VS Code-like hierarchical tree view of the connected
    project's file structure.

  - Support multi-select for files and folders via checkboxes.

  - Display rich metadata for each file: file type icon, name, file size
    (KB), and an estimated token count.

- **Advanced Git & Ignore File Support:**

  - Automatically parse .gitignore files at all levels of the directory.

  - Support a custom .pigeonpromptignore file for override rules.

  - Visually de-emphasize (e.g., gray out) ignored files and provide a
    tooltip explaining which rule caused the ignore.

  - Include a toggle to "Show/Hide Ignored Files".

  - **Git Status Awareness:** Visually indicate the Git status of each
    file (e.g., Modified, New, Staged) with color-coding or status
    letters.

- **File Previews & Snippet Selection:**

  - Display a read-only preview of any selected file with syntax
    highlighting.

  - Allow users to select specific lines or blocks of code within the
    preview.

  - Provide a one-click action to add only the selected snippet to the
    context builder.

**Technical Implementation Notes:**

- File access, parsing, and tree generation occur **client-side
  only** for maximum security. No file content is sent to a server
  unless a prompt is explicitly executed.

- Utilize a WebAssembly-powered library like **isomorphic-git** to read
  repository data (.git directory) directly in the browser.

- Use Web Workers for file parsing and token estimation to prevent
  blocking the main UI thread.

**Feature 2: Advanced Prompt Studio & Template Designer**

**Goal:** To provide a powerful and flexible interface for designing,
constructing, and managing sophisticated prompt templates using
established prompt engineering techniques.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Structured Prompt Editor:**

  - A dedicated UI with separate input fields for:

    - **System Prompt / Persona:** Define the AI's role and high-level
      instructions.

    - **User Instructions:** The primary task or question for the AI.

    - **Context:** A section where selected files, snippets, and code
      maps are automatically assembled.

    - **Examples (Few-shot):** Structured fields to provide input/output
      examples.

    - **Output Format:** Specify the desired output structure (e.g.,
      JSON, XML, Markdown).

- **Dynamic Variables & Slot-Filling:**

  - Define and use placeholders within templates
    (e.g., {{filePath}}, {{className}}, {{selectedCode}}).

  - The UI will intelligently suggest and substitute variables based on
    the current context.

- **Native Prompting Techniques Toolkit:**

  - The UI will provide first-class support for advanced techniques,
    simplifying their application:

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Technique**          **UI Feature**
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------
  **Zero/Few-shot**      Basic prompt input with structured example
                         blocks.

  **System/Role          Dedicated "System" or "Persona" input field.
  Prompting**            

  **Contextual           The Context Builder where files/snippets are
  Prompting**            added.

  **Chain of Thought     A toggle that automatically appends "Let's
  (CoT)**                think step-by-step."

  **Self-Consistency**   An option to run the same prompt *N* times and
                         view aggregated/voted-on answers.

  **Tree of Thoughts     A visual, tree-style prompt explorer to manage
  (ToT)**                parallel reasoning branches.

  **ReAct (Reason +      Framework to define external tools (e.g., Search,
  Act)**                 API calls) and manage the reason/act loop.

  **Automatic Prompt     A meta-prompt execution loop that generates and
  Eng. (APE)**           scores candidate prompts.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

- **Token Budget Management:**

  - A persistent, running total of the estimated tokens for the entire
    assembled prompt.

  - A dropdown to select a target model (e.g., "Claude 3 Opus -
    200k"), which sets the context window limit.

  - The token count display dynamically changes color (e.g., green ->
    orange -> red) as it approaches the limit.

  - Per-file controls for token management: "Full File," "Truncate to
    N tokens," "Head-only," "Tail-only."

- **Clipboard & Export Workflow:**

  - One-click "Copy" functionality that formats the entire prompt for
    different models.

  - **Copy as Text:** Concatenates all parts using Markdown for
    structure.

  - **Copy as XML:** Wraps each section in descriptive XML tags, ideal
    for models like Claude.

**Feature 3: Prompt Execution & Testing Environment**

**Goal:** To enable users to run prompts against various LLMs, compare
results side-by-side, and iterate quickly in a controlled environment.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Multi-Model Execution Engine:**

  - A configuration panel to select the target LLM (e.g., GPT-4-turbo,
    Claude 3 Sonnet, Gemini Pro, local models via Ollama).

  - Controls for model parameters: Temperature, Top-P, Top-K, Max Output
    Tokens.

  - Securely store user API keys in local storage or a secure backend
    vault.

- **Live Output & Diff Viewer:**

  - Stream the AI's response in real-time.

  - **For code generation:** Intelligently parse the output (whether
    full file or diff format) and present an interactive **side-by-side
    or inline diff viewer**.

  - Allow users to accept/reject changes on a line-by-line, hunk, or
    file-by-file basis.

  - **Apply Changes:** For desktop/electron versions or via a helper
    agent, apply accepted diffs directly to local files with automatic
    backups. For web-only, provide patched files for download or
    a .patch file.

- **Comparison & Evaluation Workspace:**

  - A side-by-side view to compare outputs from:

    - Different models for the same prompt.

    - Different prompts for the same task.

    - Multiple runs for self-consistency checks.

  - Tools for ranking, tagging (e.g., "best," "hallucination"), and
    commenting on outputs.

  - An estimated token cost for each run.

  - **Automatic Evaluation (for APE):** Optional automated scoring of
    outputs using metrics like BLEU/ROUGE or validation against a JSON
    schema.

**Feature 4: Prompt Versioning, Templates & History**

**Goal:** To create a robust system for saving, managing, and reusing
prompts and their configurations, ensuring no work is ever lost and best
practices can be easily replicated.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Automatic Prompt Run History:**

  - Every prompt execution is automatically logged with its full
    context:

    - The exact prompt text, including all system/user instructions.

    - A snapshot of the files/snippets used.

    - The full model configuration (model, temperature, etc.).

    - The complete AI output.

    - Token counts and cost estimates.

  - Allow users to "Replay," "Fork," or "Compare" any historical
    run.

- **Saved Prompt Templates (CRUD):**

  - A library for system-provided and user-created templates.

  - **System Library:** A curated set of high-quality templates for
    common tasks ("Generate Unit Tests," "Write API Docs,"
    "Refactor Code").

  - **User Library:** Full Create, Read, Update, Delete (CRUD)
    functionality for users to save and manage their own custom
    templates.

  - Templates store the prompt structure, instructions, variables, and
    model configuration.

- **Context Presets:**

  - Save and load the entire state of the Context Builder---including
    file selections, instructions, and truncation settings---as a named
    preset, stored locally in IndexedDB.

**Feature 5: Advanced Code Intelligence & Visualization (Code Maps)**

**Goal:** To automatically generate interactive, visual diagrams of the
selected code's structure, providing high-level architectural
understanding to both the user and the AI.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Automatic Diagram Generation:**

  - On-demand, generate diagrams from the selected code context.

  - The generated diagram's source text (e.g., Mermaid syntax) can be
    included in the prompt context.

- **Supported Diagram Types:**

  - **File Tree Map:** A graph showing the folder/file structure.

  - **Function/Class Diagram:** For a single file, show classes,
    methods, and properties.

  - **Inter-file Call Graph:** Visualize how functions/classes across
    multiple files call each other.

  - **Dependency Map:** Parse package.json or requirements.txt to
    visualize module dependencies.

- **Interactive Visualization:**

  - Render diagrams using a library like Mermaid.js or React Flow.

  - Diagrams are interactive (pan, zoom).

  - Clicking a node (e.g., a function name) highlights the corresponding
    file in the explorer and scrolls to the definition in the code
    preview.

**Part II: Community & Collaboration**

This section outlines features that extend the platform from a solo tool
to a collaborative and community-powered ecosystem.

**Feature 6: Community Prompt Library & Discovery**

**Goal:** To create a central hub where users can discover, share, and
validate high-quality prompts, leveraging the collective intelligence of
the community.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Public Prompt Catalogue:**

  - Launch with a pre-populated library of 500+ curated and tested
    prompts across diverse categories (Copywriting, Code Gen, Image Gen,
    etc.).

  - Browse prompts by category, target AI platform (ChatGPT, Midjourney,
    etc.), and tags.

  - Sections for "Trending," "Top Rated," and "Recently Added"
    prompts.

- **Community Submission & Moderation:**

  - A guided submission form for users to share their own prompts.

  - Submissions must include a description, the prompt text, target
    platforms, and at least one example output.

  - **Three-Tier Moderation:**

    1.  **Automated Screening:** Filter for spam and inappropriate
        content.

    2.  **Community Review:** New submissions enter a voting/review
        period.

    3.  **Trusted User Fast-Track:** Contributions from users with high
        reputation are auto-approved.

- **Voting, Rating & Feedback System:**

  - Users can upvote/downvote prompts for effectiveness.

  - Leave comments, tips, and example outputs.

  - Display trust signals: community verification badges, usage
    statistics, average ratings, and "recently tested" timestamps.

**Feature 7: Team Workspaces & Real-Time Collaboration**

**Goal:** To enable teams to collaborate on prompt engineering in a
shared, synchronized environment.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Shared Workspaces:**

  - Create workspaces to share prompts, templates, prompt history, and
    billing with team members.

  - Role-based access control (Admin, Editor, Viewer).

- **Real-Time Collaboration:**

  - Presence indicators showing which team members are currently active.

  - Real-time synchronization of the Prompt Studio and Context Builder.
    Changes made by one user are instantly visible to others.

  - **Collaborative Editing:** Google Docs-like multi-user editing with
    shared cursors in text input areas.

- **Shared History & Analytics:**

  - All prompt runs within a workspace are logged to a shared history.

  - Team-level analytics dashboard for admins to track usage and costs.

**Part III: Platform Features & UX**

This section covers cross-cutting features related to user management,
monetization, and overall user experience.

**Feature 8: User Accounts, Profiles & Settings**

**Goal:** To provide comprehensive user management, personalization, and
account control.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Secure Authentication:** Google OAuth as the primary sign-in method.

- **User Profile:** Editable display name, username, and bio.

- **Reputation System:** Users earn reputation points for positive
  contributions (approved prompts, helpful reviews), unlocking "Trusted
  User" status and badges.

- **Preferences:** Toggles for Dark/Light Mode, compact UI view, and
  notification settings.

- **Account Management:** Data export (download all personal data as
  JSON) and account deletion.

**Feature 9: Analytics & Usage Insights**

**Goal:** To provide users and teams with actionable data on their
prompting habits to optimize cost, efficiency, and effectiveness.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Personal Dashboard:**

  - Visual charts for token consumption over time, broken down by model.

  - Estimated costs based on public API pricing.

  - Breakdowns of most used models and templates.

  - Interactive, drill-down charts with time-range filtering.

- **Team Dashboard:** (For Workspace Admins)

  - Aggregated metrics for the entire team.

  - Identify top users, most expensive prompts, and popular models.

**Feature 10: Monetization (Freemium & Premium Tiers)**

**Goal:** To establish a clear business model that provides significant
value in the free tier while offering powerful enhancements for paying
customers.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Free Tier:**

  - Access to all core prompt engineering tools.

  - Access to the public community library.

  - Monthly quotas on advanced features (e.g., number of prompt runs,
    saved private templates, community submissions).

  - Limited prompt history retention.

- **Premium Tier (Individual & Team Plans):**

  - Unlimited prompt runs, private templates, and submissions.

  - Access to Team Workspaces and real-time collaboration.

  - Advanced analytics and cost tracking.

  - Priority support.

  - Access to the Browser Extension's premium features.

  - Extended prompt history retention.

**Feature 11: Platform Extensions (Browser Extension & API)**

**Goal:** To extend the platform's utility beyond the web app,
integrating it directly into users' existing workflows.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Chrome Browser Extension (Phase 2):**

  - Quick-access popup to search personal and community prompts.

  - One-click copy-paste directly into any web-based AI tool's
    interface (ChatGPT, Claude, etc.).

  - Context-aware prompt suggestions based on the current web page.

  - History of recently used prompts.

- **Public API (Phase 3):**

  - A RESTful API allowing third-party applications to programmatically
    access and run prompts.

  - Secure API key management.

  - Comprehensive documentation and rate limiting.

**Feature 12: Design System & User Experience**

**Goal:** To ensure the platform is beautiful, intuitive, accessible,
and a pleasure to use.

**Functional Requirements:**

- **Visual Design:**

  - **Color Palette:** A modern and professional palette centered around
    a Deep Purple (#7c3aed) and Electric Blue (#3b82f6) brand gradient,
    with clear semantic colors for success, warning, and error states.

  - **Typography:** A clear typographic hierarchy for readability (e.g.,
    Inter font, with distinct sizes/weights for H1, H2, body text).

  - **Component Design:** A consistent, card-based design system with
    proper spacing, shadows, and hover/focus states.

- **Navigation & Layout:**

  - A consolidated, collapsible sidebar for workspace navigation (File
    Explorer, Templates, History).

  - A clean header for global actions (Search, Settings, Profile).

  - Intelligent content display with pagination or virtualized lists to
    handle large numbers of prompts efficiently.

- **Onboarding & User Guidance:**

  - A progressive onboarding flow for new users, highlighting key
    features step-by-step.

  - Empty states with helpful tips and calls-to-action.

  - Clear, non-technical error messages with suggestions for recovery.
